---
layout: post
title: 'What does a linguist do?'
author: mayhplumb
tags: fieldwork2019 fieldwork language-documentation zapotec

---

Today I’m in Oaxaca City, Mexico.<a tabindex="0" class="footnote" data-toggle="popover" data-content="Well, I drafted this in the Mexico City airport, but I’m revising it on the rooftop balcony of my hotel in Oaxaca City, where there’s a lovely breeze, a view of the mountains, and a threat of rain."></a> Tomorrow I head to San Jerónimo Tlacochahuaya, about 20 km east of the city, where I’ll spend the next month learning about Tlacochahuaya Zapotec. Since I’m here, I thought I’d answer the question posed to me by every rideshare driver: “You’re a linguist? But, um, what do you do?”

When linguists study language, they’re seeking to understand (a) what constraints there are on how human languages work, and (b) how any particular language fits into those constraints.<!--excerpt--><a tabindex="0" class="footnote" data-toggle="popover" data-content="Not necessarily in that order of importance!"></a>  Some linguists study how a speakers of a language produce and perceive sounds (<span class="jargon">phonetics</span>), while others study how you order words in a sentence (<span class="jargon">syntax</span>). Some linguists study how language shapes and interacts with identity (<span class="jargon">sociolinguistics</span>), while others compare related languages to figure out what their ancestor language looked like thousands of years ago (<span class="jargon">historical linguistics</span>).  And of course, you can study the linguistics of any language! Mandarin, English, Portuguese, Xhosa, or any of the other <a target="_blank" title="Linguistic Society of America page on linguistic diversity" href="https://www.linguisticsociety.org/content/how-many-languages-are-there-world">nearly 7,000 thousand languages</a> are available.  By looking at different human languages from around the world, we can get a better understand of how the human ability for language works.

For the past several years, my research has focused on a language called Valley Zapotec.<a tabindex="0" class="footnote" data-toggle="popover" data-content="More precisely I study Western Tlacolula Valley Zapotec, but that is a very long name, and that amount of detail isn’t necessary here."></a> This language is spoken in the Tlacolula Valley, which stretches between Oaxaca City and Tlacolula de Matamoros. But while I call Valley Zapotec a “language”, every town in the Tlacolula Valley speaks a distinct variety.<a tabindex="0" class="footnote" data-toggle="popover" data-content="Linguists call this region a “dialect continuum” or a “dialect chain”."></a>  The <a tabindex="0" class="jargon" data-toggle="popover" data-content="Informally, this is how “healthy” the language is. While the primary factor in language vitality is the number of children who are learning the language, language vitality is also determined by things like how many contexts the language is used in (e.g. in the home, in school, in government), how much pressure there is from outside languages, and how the language is perceived.">language vitality</a> also varies from town to town. In San Jerónimo Tlacochahuaya, a town of about 2,000 people, children no longer speak the language, and the youngest fluent speaker is in his 40s.

So while I’m here in Oaxaca, what will I actually be doing? In order to learn about how Tlacochahuaya Zapotec grammar, I need to record examples of people using the language. This can be as simple as asking people to translate sentences, but it’s also important to collect examples of “natural” language. I frequently ask people to describe things for me in Tlacochahuaya Zapotec (for example, I have recordings of people telling me about <a target="_blank" title="How to plant garlic (AntonioGC)" href="https://www.ailla.utexas.org/islandora/object/ailla:262660">how to plant garlic</a> and about <a target="_blank" title="All Saints Day celebrations (JoseAM)" href="https://www.ailla.utexas.org/islandora/object/ailla:262620">local celebrations</a>) or to tell me stories. I then go through the recording sentence by sentence with one of my teacher to translate it into Spanish or English. By comparing data across many recordings, I can identify larger patterns in the languages grammar I would never be able to see in individual sentences.

[And to be clear — this is what I do. Linguists do <i>all sorts of things</i>, and even other linguists focusing on language documentation will have different priorities and methods than I do.]